Files to simulate Ising model and train CNN-LSTM classifier on the results

**ising_model_generate_data.py** is the wrapper for data generation (calling functions from **ising_model_simulate.py** and **ising_model_process_data.py**)

the variable **order_param** is used to determine the type of Ising model simulated. **temp** means temperature is varied, producing a second-order phase transition. **h** means external magnetic field is varied, producing a first-order phase transition. **temp_lin** and **h_lin** are similar, with the only difference being the treatment of null runs (in which the parameter does not pass through its critical value/region). The **lin** suffix means that the null runs are generated by varying the parameter linearly, but keeping it far from the critical point. No suffix means that the null runs are generated by holding the parameter fixed.

All implementations of the Ising model are 2D square lattice with periodic boundaries. Coupling strengths for each pair of neighbors are normally distributed about some randomized mean. The **mask_type** variable can be set to None, in which case the lattice is left intact, or "ellipse", in which case randomized elliptical regions of the lattice are excised in order to break its symmetry.

Results from the Ising simulations are coarse-grained in space and time to produce a smoother distribution of time series values. The processing carried out in **ising_model_process.py** entails choosing a number of random spatial locations and coarse-graining parameters to define subsets of the lattice on which to compute EWS statistics (spatial/temporal variance, autocorrelation, etc)

The file **ising_model_prepare_train_data.py** takes the processed results of the simulation and consolidates them into a single file **train_data.npz**

The file **ising_model_train_CNN_LSTM.py** constructs a neural network in Keras Tensorflow and trains it on this data. It trains using categorical cross-entropy loss based on binary classifications between the critical and null runs. The trained model is saved to disk and along with a number of diagnostic plots.
